### 4.2. Minimal Trees: 

Given a sorted (increasing order) array with unique integer elements, write an algorithm to create a binary search tree with minimal height. 


**Solution**

To create a tree of minimal height, we need to match the number of nodes in the left subtree to the number of nodes in the right subtree as much as possible. This means that we want the root to be the middle of the array, since this would mean that half the elements would be less than the root and half would be greater than it. 

We proceed with constructing our tree in a similar fashion. The middle of each subsection of the array becomes the root of the node. The left half of the array will become our left subtree, and the right half of the array will become the right subtree. 

One way to implement this is to use a simple root.insertNode(int v) method which inserts the value v through height but it will not do so very efficiently. Each insertion will require traversing the tree, giving a total cost of O(N logN) to the tree.

Alternatively, we can cut out the extra traversals by recursively using the createMinimalBST method. This method is passed just a subsection of the array and returns the root of a minimal tree for that array. 

The algorithm is as follows:
Insert into the tree the middle element of the array.
Insert (into the left subtree) the left subarray elements.
Insert (into the right subtree) the right subarray elements.
Recurse.


The code below implements this algorithm.

```java

TreeNode createMinimalBST(int[] array) {
	return createMinimalBST(array, 0, array.length - 1);
}

TreeNode createMinimalBST(int[] arr, int start, int end) {
	if( end < start ) {
		return null;
	}
	int mid = (start + end) / 2;
	TreeNode n = new TreeNode(arr[mid]);
	n.left = createMinimalBST(arr, start, mid-1);
	n.right = createMinimalBST(arr, mid+1, end);
	return n;
}

```

**Although this code does not seem especially complex, it can be very easy to make little off-by-one errors. Be sure to test these parts of the code very thoroughly.**
