## 4.4. Check Balanced

Implement a function to check if a binary tree is balanced. 
For the purposes of this question, a balanced tree is defined to be a tree 
such that the heights of the two subtrees of any node never differ by more than one.


#### Solution

In this question, we’ve been fortunate enough to be told exactly what balanced means: 
that for each node, the two subtrees differ in height by no more than one. 
We can implement a solution based on this definition. 
We can simply recurse through the entire tree, and for each node, compute the heights of each subtree. 


```java

int getHeight(TreeNode root) {
	if(root == null) return -1;  // Base case
  return Math.max(getHeight(root.left), getHeight(root.right)) +1;
}
boolean isBalanced(TreeNode root) {
  if(root == null) return true; // Base case
  
  int heighDiff = getHeight(root.left) - getHeight(root.right);
  if( Math.abs(heightDiff) > 1 ) {
    return false;
  } else { //Recurse
    return isBalanced(root.left) && isBalanced(root.right);
  }
}

```
Although this works, it's not very efficient. On each node, we recurse through its entire subtree. 
This means that *getHeight* is called repeatedly on the same nodes. The algorithm is O(N log N) since 
each node is "touched" once per node above it. <br />

We need to cut out some of the calls to *getHeight* <br />

If we inspect this method, we may notice that *getHeight* could actually check 
if the tree is balanced at the same time as it's checking heights. What do we do when we discover that the 
subtree isn't balanced? Just return an error code. <br />

This improved algorithm works by checking the height of each subtree as we recurse down from the root. 
On each node, we recursively get the heights of the left and right subtrees through the *checkHeight* method. 
If the subtree is balanced, then *checkHeight* will return the actual height of the subtree. 
If the subtree is not balanced, then *checkHeight* will return an error code. 
We will immediately break and return an error code from the current call.  <br />

What do we use for an error code? The height of a null tree is generally defined to be -1, so that's not a great idea
for an error code. Instead, we'll use Integer.MIN_VALUE. <br />

The code below implements this algorithm:
```java

int checkHeight(TreeNode root) {
  if(root == null) return -1;
  
  int leftHeight = checkHeight(root.left);
  if(leftHeight == integer.MIN_VALUE) return Integer.MIN_VALUE; //Pass error up
  
  int rightHeight = checkHeight(root.right);
  if( Math.abs(heightDiff) > 1 ) {
    return Integer.MIN_VALUE;  //Found error -> pass it back
  } else {
    return Math.max(leftHeight, rightHeight) +1;
  }
}

boolean isBalanced(TreeNode root) {
  return checkHeight(root) != Integer.MIN_VALUE;
}

```

This code runs in O(N) time and O(H) space, where H is the height of the tree. 






